---
title: Web 3.0
author: hugo
date: 2023-03-29 00:13:00 +0200
categories: [programming]
tags: [self hosting, decentralization, blogging]
render_with_liquid: false
---

When you think of cryptocurrencies what is the first thing that comes to your mind? For some it might be digital gold, fast, reliable and cheap transaction fees. For others it will sound more along the lines of a scam, inefficient, an ecological disaster and a ponzi scheme whose downfall might bring down the whole economy.

Whatever your opinion is you will agree with me that most humans on earth don't really care what technology that whole system is built on just as long as it provides you with a better alternative than the existing one. As a privileged person lucky enough to be living in a rich country I don't see any benefit in using any of these coins other than buying illegal stuff out on the internet. Someone will surely correct me in the future for this but I don't understand how replacing a centralized system where banks control and audit your transactions into a system controlled by a few mining corporation is going to change the world. I trust the math behind the algorithm, I don't have the technical ability to doubt it anyway but how can we be sure that the person operating these evermore concentrated systems won't fall pray to corruption? The silicon valley bank's deposits were saved a couple of weeks ago by the government even though they were not insured passed 100 k dollars. Similarly, the block chain will soon attain 1 Tb in size. Isn't it possible that this ever growing computing power requirement will further concentrate the mining community? And what if say a rich person who owns 10% of the cryptocurrency gets scammed. Do you really think that person won't be able to successfully lobby the few crypto minners to revert the transactions or `git rebase` the state of the system back to a past state? If you ever tried mining a coin with your computer you will surely know that it is not something that makes financial sense for a private citizen. You'll end up paying more on electricity than you can ever get back on commissions which is for me the problem with this technology.

I don't have a fully formed opinion on cryptocurrencies yet but what I can see is that we moved from the Web 1.0 world where users could only read what was online into Web 2.0 where users were able to read and write information into public networks. Everyone was happy with the state of affairs until they realized that all of their data was owned by multi billion dollar corporations who's sole intention is to exploit your data, censor and manipulate your thoughts by serving you targeted ads. And so the Web 3.0 was born. In this day and age I do not want to beg facebook, instagram or tik tok for my data I want to own it and have it stored on my servers. I realize that this is not manageable for everyone but judging how easy it is to set up a Tor bridge that helps ukrainians and chinese citizens bypass censorship by activating a chrome extension with 1 click I am certainly hopeful about the future. If you don't believe me have a look at how google chrome wants to force all extensions to [comply with Manifest v3 chrome](https://adlock.com/blog/google-kill-ad-blocking-extensions/) and how they are planning to spoon feed you ads whether you like it or not.

Here are for me the top 10 projects that help me live outside of the marketing matrix created by GAFA.

## 1. Email

There are open source projects out there like [Mail in a box](https://github.com/mail-in-a-box/mailinabox) but they require you to have a fixed IP address at home which, depending on your internet service provider, can be expensive or outright impossible to do. Judging by how hard it is to setup and how vital these messages are I will stick to gmail for now and assume anything I write on there is practically the same as an open letter to advertisers, government and anyone else that has the security clearance to conduct mass surveillance on your data. There are other alternatives out there like [mailbox.org](https://mailbox.org/) who promise to not snoop on your data for 3 euros a month. The website says that they are certified by the German government but we all know Wirecard the German payment platform and how corruption works. They successfully hid 2 billion euros from the BaFin (Federal Financial Supervisory Authority) and got away with it. Anyways, I might come back to this topic in the future.

## 2. Notepad

Have you ever tried trello? I find it very useful when mapping out my ideas or when I have a large amount of tasks to perform to add them into a kanban style board. And this is where Trellis fills in most if not all of my needs in terms of ease of use and practicality. It is running on a mongo database that is sitting on your computer so no one can touch it and you can also access it wherever you are since it provides a nice UI to authenticate yourself over the internet.

I use [Trellis](https://github.com/hupratt/Trellis) every single day and I could not live without it. I've added a missing because its handling of the delete action was a bit lacking in my opinion.

## 3. Password manager

Zero knowledge architecture apps are changing the game for password managers. What if you could 


## 4. Email
## 5. Email
## 6. Email
## 7. Email
## 8. Email
## 9. Email
## 10. Email
